Add documentation for Storefront Components (#2283)
shopware/docs: concepts/framework/storefront-components.md

---
nav:
  title: Storefront Components
  position: 90

---

# Storefront Components

Since Shopware 6.7.11.0, the default Storefront includes a new component system based on [Symfony UX Twig Components](https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-twig-component/current/index.html).
It enables developers to build reusable, atomic component templates in Twig and introduces additional Shopware-specific features for handling SCSS and JavaScript, bringing a more modern, framework-like development experience to the Storefront.

## Creating Components

> Creating a new component is straightforward. All you need to do is create the corresponding files for your component in the right directory. All components live in `views/components/` of their specific Symfony bundle, like the Shopware Storefront, or your own extension. There are two different ways to define a component, which will be covered in the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a new component is straightforward. All you need to do is create the corresponding files for your component in the right directory. All components live in `Resources/views/components/` of their specific Symfony bundle, like the Shopware Storefront, or your own extension. There are two different ways to define a component, which will be covered in the following:
```

### Custom Vite config for extensions

An app or plugin can provide an optional custom `vite.components.config.mts`. Use the shared Shopware factory and only override what you need:

```ts
// Resources/app/storefront/vite.components.config.mts
import path from 'node:path';
import { createComponentBuildConfig } from '../../../../../../src/Storefront/Resources/app/storefront/build/vite/component-config-factory';

export default async () => {
    const storefrontAppDir = import.meta.dirname;

    return createComponentBuildConfig({
        componentRoot: path.resolve(storefrontAppDir, '../../views/components'),
        outDir: path.resolve(storefrontAppDir, 'dist-es/components'),
        namespace: 'MyExtension',
        storefrontAppDir,
        sourcemap: true,
    });
};
```

## Component Dev-Server

For development there is a new dev-server feature available, also based on Vite. It provides live reload and component imports but also supports style and script files of the normal theme system, so you can work on both simultaneously.

```bash
composer storefront:dev-server
```

> When the dev-server is running, you can open your normal Storefront. The assets are injected automatically from the Vite dev-server. No proxy needed. When you stop the dev-server, the Storefront will serve production assets again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the dev-server is running, you can open your normal Storefront URL. The assets are injected automatically from the Vite dev-server. No proxy needed. When you stop the dev-server, the Storefront will serve production assets again.
```

---
nav:
  title: Storefront Components
  position: 90

---

# Storefront Components

Since Shopware 6.7.11.0, the default Storefront includes a new component system based on [Symfony UX Twig Components](https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-twig-component/current/index.html).
It enables developers to build reusable, atomic component templates in Twig and introduces additional Shopware-specific features for handling SCSS and JavaScript, bringing a more modern, framework-like development experience to the Storefront.

## Creating Components

> Creating a new component is simple. All you need to do is create the corresponding files for your component in the right directory. All components live in `views/components/` of their specific Symfony bundle, like the Shopware Storefront, or your own extension. There are two different ways to define a component, which will be covered in the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a new component is simple. All you need to do is create the corresponding files for your component in the right directory. All components live in `Resources/views/components/` of their specific Symfony bundle, like the Shopware Storefront, or your own extension. There are two different ways to define a component, which will be covered in the following:
```

        commponents/
          Button/
            Primary.html.twig
```

**Example Structure for Apps:**

```Plaintext
MyExtension/
    Resources/
      views/
        commponents/
          Button/
            Primary.html.twig
```

The directory and file structure of your component also defines the name of your component. Components from Shopware extensions are also automatically namespaced with the name of the extension (bundle). The shown example will create the component `MyExtension:Button:Primary`.

There is also the option to name the template file `index.html.twig` to just use the directory name as the component name. This can be useful if you have a larger namespace with several subcomponents, or you just want to avoid the nesting but still keep all files of your component in one place.

**Example Structure for Plugins:**

```Plaintext
MyExtension/
  src/
    Resources/
      views/
        commponents/
          Button/
            index.html.twig
```

**Example Structure for Apps:**

```Plaintext
MyExtension/
    Resources/
      views/
        commponents/
          Button/
            index.html.twig
```

This example will create the component `MyExtension:Button`.

> In anonymous components you can define properties for your component right within the template. Properties are configuration options that can be used to pass data to your component. You can define default values for these properties and use the data within your component template as usual Twig variables.

Reviewer: Maybe add a small headline here? "component properties"

Author: ✅ Done

To learn what kind of possibilities the PHP implementation of your component offers, you can just refer to the [official documentation](https://symfony.com/bundles/ux-twig-component/current/index.html).

## Adding Component Styles

By default, there is no corresponding style system in Twig components, but we wanted to provide a seamless component system, like other modern frontend frameworks. Therefore, we added automated style handling to the Storefront Components, which works similarly to other theme styles in Shopware. All you need to do is create a matching SCSS or CSS file for your component, which follows the same naming pattern.

**Example Structure for Plugins:**

```Plaintext
MyExtension/
  src/
    Resources/
      views/
        commponents/
          Button/
            Primary.html.twig
            Primary.scss
```

**Example Structure for Apps:**

```Plaintext
MyExtension/
    Resources/
      views/
        commponents/
          Button/
            Primary.html.twig
            Primary.scss
```

Within that file, you can add your component-specific styles.

> **Important Note:** Other than usual theme files, the style files of components are **not** compiled with the PHP-based theme compiler. For the Storefront Components there is a new build process based on Vite. Extensions that provide new components have to provide the compiled build artifacts of their components. They are not recompiled on runtime and therefore only have access to information that are available on build time. Further information can be found in the section about the build process further down below.

Reviewer: We could add a link here to the Vite section. `## Component Build Process`

Author: ✅ Done

### Accessing Theme Configuration

> Storefront components are not compiled with PHP and therefore don't have access to theme variables in SCSS. Instead, the theme configuration can be accessed as native CSS custom properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Storefront components SCSS is not compiled with PHP and therefore does not have access to theme variables in SCSS. Instead, the theme configuration can be accessed as native CSS custom properties.
```
